Youre having a dinner date with your sweetheart. In the meanwhile, you find a perfect moment to take a selfie with her. You reach into your pocket to pull out your phone, you realize that its missing. Did the phone misplace somewhere in the restaurant? Or maybe at home? or the worst case did someone steal it? Your mind races. You have no idea. what to do? how to locate it? Read this article till the end to find out the missing phone.

Almost all Android phones come with a tracking feature called Find My Device. This feature will automatically track your phones location. So whenever you feel like you lost your phone or stolen it by someone you can use this to find your phones location. Even if your phone is in switch off it will show the last location of your phone when it was active. All you have to do is open find my device in google browser in your laptop or in your friends phone.

The most important thing you should do is make sure your phone is all set up to be foundbefore it goes missing. In most cases, your phone is already activated but anyhow below steps are just to confirm whether it is activated or not.

In newer Android phones, the Find My Device service is already located conveniently in your Settings app, but if you cant find it out you can alwaysdownload Find My Deviceapp from the Google Play Store. These are just a couple of things youll need to activate.

Just by logging into your google account by computer or any other android phone you can find your missing phone.

If you want to download a tracking app for fear of a missing phone crisis, there are a number of options to choose from, and I am highlighting some choice picks for you. These apps can help you a lot in locating your missing phone.

Lookout has both tracking your device and providing a good antivirus protection to your device. It comes with both the free version and pro version depending on your budget you can select which one you want. It has many better features compared to google find my device. It will automatically save your devices location when the battery is low. You can check other features on their official website.

Family Locator Offers Real-Time Location Data, unlike other apps family locator, allows you to track all Circle Members in your group. For example, you can track your friends, family etc. Works on both android and ios so, you can track any device irrespective of operating system. You can create your own groups, called Circles, of loved ones, friends, teammates whoever matters you the most and one more thing you can chat with them in Family Locator for FREE. Get real-time alerts when Circle Members arrive at or leave destinations.

It will become lengthy if I go into detail about each and every app so I leave it up to you to find out which one best suits for your smartphone.

Anyhow,Google find my device comes with an inbuilt version of your mobile so anyhow you can use that but I recommend you to use any one 3rd party application as they come up with better and more features than find my device. So, from now dont be over tensed whenever you lost your phone just follow these steps to find out the missing phone.