We almost get everything in play storefor free in the form of an app, from a basic to the most powerful but there are still some apps which need tobe paid for regular usage. So here is a small trick to get those paid apps for free without the use of a single penny. Dont worry, your phone doesnt need to be rooted for this trick.

I know many ofyou do not prefer readingbecause these days videos have dominated theentire world. Everyone prefers a youtube video than a blog thatswhy I cameup with an idea of dividing the posts intotwo halves one with the brief content andother with an elaborate detail so thatusers can decidewhich one they want.

Download the application AC MARKET, which is an unofficial app. Which means that you wont get this app in the play store and you will have to download its apk file from somewhere else. As you are not going to download it from play store, you will need to configure your settings in your mobile so that you can download it from any unknown sources. For this,go to yourSettings->Security->then switch on the Unknown sources button. Location of unknown sources button may be different for different mobiles but you will find it in your phone settings only.

Click on this link todownload the appAC MARKETand it will take direct you to the website. There you can see the download button. Just click it on and the file and acmarket.apk will start downloading. Once it has been downloaded, click on install.

It will look like this:

A very well known popular game on Android that isMinecraftwhich costs Rs 479.56 in android playstorebut if you follow the above procedure you will completely get it for free. Almost all paid apps will be available free for download.

ACMarket has been fully tested by the developers for stability and security but, as with any eternal, third-party app, you should ensure that your device is protected by an anti-virus as not all the games and apps in the store can be guaranteed as safe. Not a problem if you dont have anti-virus. I mentioned it just for security purpose.

If you find this useful please share this with your friends so that I can come up with more amazing posts in future.