First, I want to say that I really enjoyed reading this article, it has some amazing and pioneer ideas!

I am very fond of recommendation systems. I have developed a plethora of them and I have also used machine learning in order to predict user behaviors. There are also many options available out there to consume as APIs . A recommendation system is an algorithm that recommends objects relevant to our “needs” and liking, but to actually find what I really like, what is important for me at this very moment, is something very, VERY difficult!

ML Mixed provides that very thing, something that you can easily adjust and tune to your personal liking. You do not have to worry about bootstrapping the system nor the weights of the external factors (friends, friends of friends, etc)

The idea of a sliding mixer to declare to what you are into at this moment is an amazing idea that solves A LOT of problems, problems that are always there when I develop a recommendation algorithm. Especially, when you include techniques such as recommendations based not only on music genres and categories but on other track features too, like rhythm and emotion similarity, fast or slow pace of the track, etc. Spotting mood changes and likings on the spot (in real time) is something really difficult, and ML Mixer gives that option to the user.

Combining Machine Learning with a Recommendation algorithm is something that is not very common in the music industry. Due to my current involvement with a revolutionary music/social platform called Orfium this idea is the ideal candidate for an amazing recommendation algorithm. It will not only be convenient for the user to find the music tracks that want to hear, but to socialize, share music beliefs, make friends, exchange tracks and so much more!

I love metal music, and most of the times I find myself searching by genre to find what I like. Sometimes tho, I may find a random track that actually suits my liking but is a totally different genre, or is it? For instance, I really like “Rock You Like A Hurricane” by Scorpions from the album Moment Of Glory and recently I found the song Battle Cry from Two Steps From Hell. One is genre rock and the other is Epic, neo-classical. Both tho, have similar traits.

This is a very challenging problem and very hard to solve. We have our hands on deep learning and recommendation algorithms and our final goal is to marry those two terms in order to create a potent recommendation engine. Considering deep learning, we are investigating genre, mood, and rhythm classification based on the audio in order to better classify the tracks. The recommendation engine will then recommend tracks that may seem different but they will have similar traits.

I strongly believe that ML Mixer has the potential to shine in Orfium. We provide not only a music platform where everyone can upload their music but a strong social platform, where artists and fans can share their option, exchange beliefs and much more! Also, users are able to connect their account to their social media, making it easier to extract public information about the user likings. Having a friend system already in place alongside with the social media connection can really boost the performance of ML Mixer.