Following Dave Robinson’s sage tweet to write a blog post when you’ve given the same advice three times, this post is a collection of my thoughts and recommendations for people interested in applying to data science jobs in the US. Many of these principles also apply to tech jobs in general.

A disclaimer: I have never worked as a recruiter or career coach. This knowledge comes from mainly from my study of Organizational Behavior (including negotiations and women in tech) in graduate school and my own career. This advice also will not fit every single situation. The people who will benefit the most from this post are probably those who are applying for their first data science job and/or are in or recently out of school. If there’s another tip or a caveat I should add, send me a note on twitter!

Take stock of your online presence. Check your privacy settings on Facebook or any other social media you use to make sure you’ve limited what’s available publicly. While many online job applications now have places for twitter handles, don’t include yours unless you use it mainly in a professional manner (e.g. tweeting about data science resources or pets. Pets are always appropriate).

If you have a GitHub, pin the repos you want people to see and add READMEs that explain what the project is. I also strongly recommend creating a blog to write about data science, whether it’s projects you’ve worked on, an explanation of a machine learning method, or a summary of a conference you attended. If you need more convincing that blogging is a great use of your time, check out this post by Dave Robinson on the subject. If you program in R, you can use blogdown to create a website. Emily Zabor has written a great tutorial for this; find more blogdown resources in Mara Averick’s extensive list. If you don’t use R, you can use Hugo (which blogdown is built on top of) directly or start out with Medium.

Check out my previous posts about finding community and reaching out if you’re interested to read more about how you can build your network.

For the initial offer, you may get a phone call, an email with the details, or an email asking for time to go over the offer by phone. In all cases, make sure you express your excitement and gratitude for the opportunity. Don’t accept right away: get the full offer in writing, say you need to review it, and ask if you can reconnect in a few days. This sets the stage for negotiating and gives you time if you’re considering other offers. If you need more information (e.g. starting date possibilities, health insurance information), you should ask for it before your second conversation so you can have the full picture.

Unfortunately, you probably won’t get offers (or rejections) from all the companies you’re interested in at once. More likely, when you get an offer, you might be in the final round for another company, just finished with the phone screen in another, and waiting to hear back from others. What if one of the ones you’re waiting on is your “dream job”?

If you’re in or very close to the final round with a company, tell them about your other option. Reiterate how interested you are in their company (and if they’re your first choice, tell them!), but explain that you’re received another offer and would appreciate if they would be able to give you a decision by X date. Recruiters understand that you’re likely to be interviewing with other companies and deal with this situation all the time. If you’re very early in the other process, it’s unlikely they’ll be able to speed it along enough to have an offer in time, and you may need to decide whether to accept the offer without knowing your other options.

Even if the offer is more than you expected or it would be a big increase from your current job, you should negotiate. Tech companies expect you to negotiate. You can almost always get at least another $5k or a 5% increase in base salary and very likely more depending on the company and original offer. You could also ask for a signing bonus or more stock options. Remember that it’s not selfish or greedy to negotiate:

Also think about the non-monetary benefits you’re interested in. For example, maybe you want to be able to work from home one day a week. Maybe you want them to cover the cost of two conferences a year. If it’s a smaller company, you can ask for a different job title.

How much you can negotiate for depends on your bargaining position and the company. A non-profit will probably have less room on salary. If you have another offer or you’re well compensated in your current job, you have a strong alternative. If you have a rare skill that they recruited you for or the role has been open for a long time, it’s going to be harder for them to find someone else. You should do your research on the salary websites mentioned above so you can explain why you’re asking for the numbers you are. Aim high so you have room to compromise and give a number, not a range - if you say you’re looking for between a 5k and 10k increase, they’ll probably give you the 5k. Reiterate why you’re excited about the company and position and how you bring X, Y, Z to the table. Finally, start the conversation with the set of things you’re interested in instead of raising and settling one issue after another. This way, they’ll both feel they have the picture of what you want and you can do compromises among issues (e.g. you might accept a $5k base salary increase and $5k signing bonus instead of a $10k base salary increase).

I highly recommend reading more about how to negotiate well; this HBR article with 15 rules for negotiating an offer and this one with advice for women (who unfortunately need to adopt different negotiation tactics) are good places to start.

It is very, very, very rare for a company to pull an offer because you negotiated. If they do, you do not want to work there.

One caveat: if you’re negotiating and you get everything you ask for, the company expects you to accept! You of course don’t have to, but you shouldn’t be stringing along a company you’re not serious about. And knowing you’ll accept also allows you to say the magic words, “If we can get to X, Y, and Z, I would be thrilled to accept the offer.”

Job hunting is stressful, especially if you’re working full-time and/or looking to change industries. I hope this post has given you a good starting point for understanding the hiring process in data science, what mistakes to avoid, and what strategies you can leverage in the process. If you’re still looking more, this is an incredibly comprehensive guide from Favio Vazquez, which includes his own thoughts and links to dozens of resources.

As I said at the start, feedback and additions to this post are very welcome! Thank you to Ilana Mauskopf, Dana Levin-Robinson, Jesse Maegan, Philipp Singer, Jonathan Nolis, and Michael Berkowitz for their additions to this post.