The Senate Wednesday voted to preserve net neutrality, with three Republicans joining all of the chambers Democrats and independents to block a Federal Communications Commission plan to undo Obama-era rules governing the internet. The vote is a major victory for net neutrality activists, but the plan still has a long way to go before it could take effect.

Senators Susan Collins (R-Maine), John Kennedy (R-Louisiana), and Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska) crossed the aisle to defend net neutrality in what was otherwise a party-line vote. The final tally was 52-47.

In 2015, the Obama-era Federal Communications Commission passed a sweeping set of regulations that banned broadband providers such as Comcast and Verizon from blocking, throttling, or otherwise discriminating against lawful internet content. Last December, the now Republican dominated FCC voted to toss those rules out. The measure approved Wednesday, sponsored by Senator Ed Markey (D-Massachusetts), would block the FCC's December order, which is scheduled to take effect June 11, and leave the Obama-era rules on the books. But it also requires approval by the House and the signature of President Trump.

The proposal passed narrowly in the Senate, where activists only needed to win over two Republicans. In the House, they'll have to woo more than 20 Republicans, even with unanimous Democratic support. Meanwhile, the White House has expressed support for FCC chair Ajit Pai's decision to reverse the Obama-era rules, and Trump denounced net neutrality in a 2014 tweet. It's a longshot, but it's not quite impossible. Trump is known to change his mind from time to time, and House Republicans could decide that voting against net neutrality would be politically problematic.

"Today, we show the American people who sides with them, and who sides with the powerful special interests and corporate donors who are thriving under this administration," Markey said from the Senate floor.

Net neutrality enjoys bipartisan support among voters according to a survey conducted by Program for Public Consultation at the University of Maryland last December. That survey found that after the issue was explained to them, 83 percent of respondents, including 89 percent of Democrats and 75 percent of Republicans, favored keeping the Obama-era rules.

It echoes other polls, such as one published by Freedman Consulting last year finding that more than 80 percent of respondents, including 73 percent of Republicans, favor some sort rules banning broadband providers from blocking or discriminating against content.

The issue has also received an enormous amount of attention, from segments on Last Week Tonight with John Oliver to tweets from Star Wars star Mark Hamill. Opposing net neutrality could be a liability in November's mid-term elections. That's left some Republicans trying to position themselves as pro-net neutrality.

I rise in support of net neutrality, Senator John Thune (R-South Dakota) said from the Senate floor. Like a few other Republicans, he said he supports the principles of net neutrality, but opposes the FCCs 2015 rules as excessive because they reclassified broadband providers as Tile II "common carriers" similar to traditional telephone services.

Thune said the issue should be resolved by Congress, not the FCC, and that Markeys proposal only wastes time because it is so unlikely to be approved by the House. He urged Democrats and Republicans to come together and support a version of his 2015 bill. That bill would ban blocking, throttling, and paid fast lanes, but would also curb the powers of the FCC to regulate broadband providers. For example, Thune said he doesnt think the government should stop broadband providers from exempting their own content from data caps. The Obama-era rules gave the FCC the authority to regulate such exemptions, known as zero rating on a case by case basis. Net neutrality advocates worry broadband providers could use zero rating to hobble competitors and startups. AT&T already exempts its DirecTV Now streaming television service from its customers mobile data limits, while competing services like SlingTV and Netflix count against those caps. Thune accused Democrats of partisanship for not working with him to improve his bill, which he reintroduced Wednesday.

Thunes proposal falls short of what net neutrality advocates favor. But it goes further than another Republican bill sponsored by Representative Marsha Blackburn (R-Tennessee) in the House and Senator Kennedy (R-Louisiana), who voted in favor of Markeys legislation, in the Senate. The Blackburn-Kennedy bill would prohibit internet providers from blocking websites and services, but wouldn't ban paid "fast lanes." It would also block states from passing their own stronger net neutrality rules.

Senator James Lankford (R-Oklahoma) said the FCC rules put broadband providers at a disadvantage to websites like Google and Facebook, because, he said, Google and Facebook can decide what content their customers see. Lankford suggested the government shouldnt pass net neutrality rules, but should let the Federal Trade Commission enforce existing antitrust laws against both broadband providers and services like Facebook.

Democrats focused on describing what the internet could be like without net neutrality protections and portraying Pais move to dismantle those protections as a gift to telecom companies. Senator Ron Wyden (D-Oregon), a long time supporter of net neutrality emphasized the importance of fair access to content for rural voters and speculated that paid fast lanes could slow the spread of telemedicine. Senator Patty Murray (D-Washington) emphasized the importance of net neutrality to education.

Even if the legislation fails in the House, there are other options for protecting net neutrality. Several states, consumer groups, and companies are suing the FCC over the decision, and a few states have enacted their own net neutrality protections.