If you were to go compare cryptocurrency exchange rate pairs today, you would notice the assumed common ones such as BTC/USD, ETH/USDT, (insert altcoin here)/BTC, etc. But also at the top, you would notice BTC/KRW. If you arent familiar with what KRW is, it standsfor the South Korean Won and if you were to add up how much KRW volume there is in the top five cryptocurrencies today, it would be over $1 billion. Keep in mind that South Korea is a nation of 51 million people which is only 1% of the global population. So what can account for their outsized proportional involvement in the cryptocurrency market? Several factors in their culture and geography have made this possible such as advanced technological infrastructure, e-sports popularity, commonality of virtual goods, an inclination to gamble, and demographic proximity.

As a response to the 1997 Asia Financial Crisis, the South Korean government invested heavily in telecommunications and internet infrastructure. It is no surprise today that the country has one of the fastest internet connections in the world with 93% of its population online. Along with investing in their technological infrastructure, the South Korean government help cultivate an environment that helped e-sports grow and thrive. By the early 2000s, professional gaming leagues began to appear and Koreans would play e-sports in gaming clubs like Americans do pickup basketball on local courts. Today, Koreans are the best gamers in the world and the top players are celebrities in the country. The gaming culture that has developed in South Korea over the past 20 years transitioned its citizens to a digital world.

South Korea is already adept at handling transactions digitally. In 2017, South Korea spent over $3 billion dollars in the Google app store on Digital Goods such ascharacter avatars, digital gifts and application upgrades. With South Koreas popular gaming culture, the Keeping up with the Joneses effect inclines people to spend more on gaming accessories and they arent afraid to either. In one game called Lineage, players spend nearly $1,000 on limited edition swords and axes. By being adept to put a substantial amount of money in the digital world, the transition to cryptocurrency is an easy move.

Over half the population of South Korea lives in Seoul. In such a small area with a high population, information travels from person to person more quickly and then people act upon that information. In 2015, a number of Koreans were early crypto investors, dude to the fact that they wanted to be the first to the crypto boom like early adopters of Bitcoin.

With a combination of close proximation, homogenous culture, and inclination towards digital products, South Korea will likely lead the way in redefining itself as a crypto-powered nation. It will be interesting to see which countries will follow. Most likely, the will be countries with underdeveloped banking institutions as well as an unstable national fiat currency. It will similar to how many of the developing countries of the world skipped installing landlines in favor of mobile phones. The question of the number of countries that take the collective leap in following South Korea remains to be seen, but for those that do, they will be well-positioned to take advantage of the evolving crypto-economy in the 21st century.