Internet Users, Better Beware:

 There Are Prying Eyes On-Line While you sign on to the Internet and blithely zap and receive electronic mail, visit Web sites and bare your soul in on-line discussion groups, you are increasingly being watched and tracked. Who are the watchers? They could be anyone, from savvy marketers to company managers. What are they watching? Anything and everything involving both your personal and professional life. Information about you is already on the Internet for millions of eyes to see. Some Web sites, for example, will give out your name, address, phone number, driving record -- even your Social Security number -- to any interested party. Such information is part of the public record, but before the Internet came along it was buried in some out-of-the-way government archive; now it's only a few mouse clicks away. But the disturbing thing for privacy-seekers isn't just that you're on file on the Web. It's also that every move you make on the Internet can be followed, and the information gathered can be used against you. Make a purchase on the Internet, and your credit-card number could fall into the wrong hands. Visit a Web site, and you could be deluged with sales pitches from marketers who are tracking you and building a profile of your interests. Your computer at work is no haven. Send an e-mail message to a co-worker, and there's no guarantee your boss isn't reading it, too. Squander company time by cruising the Web, visiting sex-related sites or sending huge quantities of private e-mails, and you may get called into the office to account for it. Even corporations aren't immune from watchers. Their e-mail systems can be infiltrated by hackers, and sensitive data sent over the Web can be intercepted by unscrupulous competitors. And in their own version of "Spy vs. Spy," companies can keep tabs on each other by analyzing how often rivals visit their Web sites. "On the Internet, there are very few rules of the road when it comes to privacy," says Deidre Mulligan, staff counsel for the Center for Democracy and Technology, a Washington-based Internet advocacy group. "Information can be collected and disclosed and used against you without your knowledge." Experts warn that the problem could get worse. Lower costs may persuade businesses to transmit ever-more-sensitive corporate data over the Web, leaving them more exposed unless adequate protections are taken. And as the Internet gains in popularity, more individuals will be signing on who are unaware of just how easily their privacy can be penetrated in cyberspace. Here's a rough guide through some of the more common trouble spots, and some of the ways consumers and businesses can protect themselves: One of the biggest misconceptions is that using e-mail is equivalent to having a whispered conversation in a secluded, locked room. Far from it. Many employees and university students don't realize that their e-mail correspondence is actually company or university property, and can be looked at or stored at these institutions' whims. A nosy system administrator at the company can take a peek at any e-mail sent or received. This is especially true when a message "bounces" because it has been incorrectly addressed; in such cases, it ends up in the part of the computer system where all messages with bad coding are collected, and the contents can easily be read by a system administrator. "People should not operate in a corporate environment and ask another employee for a date and assume that they are protected for privacy," says Jerry Berman, executive director of the Center for Democracy and Technology. Moreover, hackers can get into the e-mail system. When you transmit a message, it gets stored along the way in several computers, including the "servers" owned by Internet service providers. Hackers have discovered ways to get into these servers and set up "sniffer" software. Then the sniffer works like a wiretap, picking up a particular user's e-mail dispatches. The loopholes in the system should especially worry businesses that depend heavily on e-mail to zap sensitive data. "Compromised e-mail is relatively common," says Joel McNamara, an Internet-security consultant in Seattle. "But companies don't like talking about their e-mail being hacked because they open themselves up to liability issues" with employees, customers and shareholders. One way to plug the gap is through software that encrypts e-mail; only users who have been provided with an electronic "key" can then read the contents of a message. The most popular software that lets you do this is called Pretty Good Privacy. Users can also access an "anonymous remailer" site that obscures the identity of senders by providing them with an e-mail pseudonym. The problem is that the outfit providing the remailer software must maintain a database that matches specific users to their ID tags, and it's possible that such a database could be accessed by certain employees or hackers. Every time you visit a Web site, you leave telltale information about where you're coming from, the kind of computer being used and other data. In fact, these Web sites can "finger" back and sometimes find your name, phone number and address if the information is stored on your computer, especially on machines that run on Unix operating systems. Your e-mail address also tells outsiders something about you. A user, for instance, often has an address that looks like this: jsmith@acme.com. The first bit usually is some version of the individual's first or last name. The next part often signals the institution or company with which the person is affiliated. And the last part indicates whether the e-mail is being sent from a company (.com), a university (.edu) or an organization (.org). So when you leave your e-mail address at a Web site, it may be traced back to you. Thus, companies with Internet sites can keep tabs on who visits, how often, and for how long. A Web merchant will know which products you browsed; a Web magazine can pinpoint the specific articles you read. This information is extremely valuable to marketers, who can then blanket users with tailor-made pitches. "It's a marketing person's dream," says Jay Friedland, a vice president of Spyglass Inc., a Naperville, Ill., company that develops monitoring software. For users, though, it could be a nightmare. The prospect of being bombarded by marketing pitches set off a furor recently when users learned that Netscape Communications Corp.'s popular browser included a feature known as Cookies, which allowed Internet merchants to automatically track what customers were looking at in their Web sites. Netscape gave in to the complaints; in the current version of its browser, users can deactivate Cookies, though they must take specific steps to do so. Users are also being tracked in the workplace, as corporations increasingly catch on to the idea of monitoring employees' movements on the Web. In recent months, Compaq Computer Corp. and Lockheed Martin Space & Missiles Co., a unit of Lockheed Martin Corp., separately fired several workers after discovering they had made thousands of visits to sex sites from work. And chances are, you won't know the bosses are tracking you. "Half of our corporate customers don't want their employees to know that they've got our monitoring software in place," says Mr. Friedland of Spyglass. There isn't a lot that workplace users can do to avoid being monitored. But home-based consumers have an option they may not be aware of. They can download certain software, known as anonymizers, that will act as a middleman and mask who they are and where they're coming from. With the World Wide Web being used increasingly for commerce and banking, consumers need to be careful about giving out personal information, including Social Security numbers, e-mail addresses and especially credit-card information. It's unlikely that reputable merchants will deliberately hand over data to others, but their computers, where such data is stored, may be tempting targets for hackers. Worse, crooks could set up a fake Web site -- say, for Bloomingdale's -- and collect hundreds of credit-card numbers from unwary shoppers. Experts urge consumers to use care when giving out a credit-card number on the Web. They say people should avoid using a card at sites they aren't familiar with, and if buying at the site of a well-known merchant, they should call the merchant directly to verify that the site exists. For Internet merchants, banks and brokerage houses, their main problem is verifying that customers are who they say they are. VeriSign Inc., of Mountain View, Calif., has a "digital ID" that could help many companies. The product "is cyberspace's equivalent of the driver's license," says Gina Jorasch, the company's director of product marketing. "It tells who the user is, and what privileges he or she has." The ID is built into a user's browser, and when the user tries to get access to, say, a bank account, the bank's computer will search the user's browser and verify that the user has privileges for that particular account. VeriSign's digital ID is already built into Netscape's browser, which means that Netscape users needn't take any extra steps to set it up.