We might as well begin with the most generous interpretation of Elon Musks peculiar behavior. For this, we must go back in timeback before the Reddit-flavored subtweets, before the bizarre earnings-call outbursts, before the supervillain cosplaying. Go back far enough, to another century, to another millennium, where, in the year 1996, you will find Elon Musk, a man in the newspaper business. Elon Musk, a nobody on the cusp of becoming a somebody. This nobody was not a newspaperman in any real sense of the word. He was certainly not a reporter speaking truth to power in service of the public good, or a journalist probing the complexities of some systemic social ill, or fighting corruption in the name of government accountability. Rather, he was a man who encountered the journalism industry at a pivotal moment, at the golden dawn of the dot-com age, and saw stretched out before him an opportunity for the seizing. And so he seized it.

Musk, with his younger brother Kimbal, was one of the founders of the website Zip2, a hybrid business directory and mapping service, which was sold to newspaper publishers as a software package to bring print classifieds, real-estate listings, and auto deals online at the turn of the century. The enterprise seems such a relic now, more than two decades later, that its easy to blip over just how revolutionary it once was. Newspapers were finally but belatedly rattled by the first major technological disruption to the industry since television, and still oblivious about how bad things already were for them. They poured money into the Musk brothers venture. Its slogan was, We Power the Press. Zip2s technology platformwith its intuitive Java(TM)-based maps, precise door-to-door directions, and internet-to-fax capabilitiesis unparalleled, said Bob Ingle, then a vice president at Knight-Ridder, a major newspaper publisher at the time, in a statement announcing a partnership between the two companies in September 1996. It helps us deliver dynamic and useful services to our readers, and lets us bring our advertisers into a new medium in a powerful and exciting way." Knight-Ridder rolled out Zip2 to the websites of its flagship papers, including the Mercury Center (San Jose Mercury News), Philadelphia Online (The Philadelphia Inquirer and Philadelphia Daily News), HeraldLink (Miami Herald), Charlotte.com (Charlotte Observer), Pioneer Planet (St. Paul Pioneer Press), and News@Sentinel (Fort Wayne News-Sentinel). Many more publishers followed suit, betting that print media could keep its stranglehold on local advertising in the internet age, as long as the good guys from Silicon Valley were there to provide technical support. The New York Times has served our readers in New York for over 100 years, Arthur Sulzberger Jr. said in a statement when the Times announced its partnership with Zip2 in 1997. This new digital initiative will be a cornerstone of our service for the next 100 years.

Such partnerships seem hopelessly nave by todays standards. Tech platforms have siphoned off most online ad revenue for themselves, and news organizations are largely resigned to operating at the whims of algorithms that are designed to minimize journalisms reach. (Cough, Facebook, cough.) Editors and publishers should have seen it coming. After all, Musk, for his part, was already irritated about his companys role as a behind-the-scenes force, second to the papers themselves, in the late 1990s. He believed the company could offer interesting services directly to consumers, Ashlee Vance wrote in his 2015 biography of Musk, Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future. In other words, why bother with the newspapers at all? Musks frustration, which predated the existence of publishing platforms like Facebook and Twitter, was prescient. His personal fortune was imminent. Sixteen months after the Times announced its partnership with Zip2, Compaq acquired it for $307 million. Compaq believed Zip2 could enhance AltaVista, which was at the time a strong search-engine competitor to Google. Musk netted $22 million in the deal, and never looked back at the media business. Until now. It doesnt matter that the thing that set off Musk was so banal. In an earnings call earlier this month, Musk repeatedly interrupted analysts and insulted them for their questions. Excuse me, he said at one point, cutting off a query about capital expenditures. Boring, bonehead questions are not cool. Next?

From there, things got very weird, very quickly. In a response to a question about Tesla Model 3 reservations, Musk said, Were going to go to YouTube. Sorry. These questions are so dry. Theyre killing me! Musk then turned over questioning to the YouTuber Galileo Russell, a fanboy investor who has published several fawning videos about Musk and Tesla. For context, one of Russells recent videos is titled:  How Tesla Will Become Profitable in 2018  and his YouTube bio contains this disclaimer: Do not assume any facts and numbers in this video are accurate. Always do your own due diligence. Once Musk turned to Russell in the earnings call, he let him ask a dozen questions over the course of a long 23 minutes. Russell then recapped the call in a frenetic YouTube video titled, WE GOT ON THE TESLA EARNINGS CALL. Im still basically in complete shock right now, he told his viewers. Just still shook, processing this entire epic situation. Sports reporters have a saying that every good journalist ought to absorb. Theres no cheering in the press box. The idea is this: You can bear witness to the most dramatic, poetic, unbelievable sequence of events ever to transpire in the history of the thing youre covering, and you better damned well keep your cool anyway. Journalists are not in it to be impressed by the people they interview. Theyre in it, on behalf of the public, to get information, to ask tough questions, to give voice to the voiceless. Theres no reason that Russell, the YouTuber, should be held to such a standard if hes not a professional journalist. But the democratization of publishing technologies means that the lines between professionals and amateurs is ever-blurring, which can be a good thing. But in this case, Musk, a man who made his fortune off of the newspaper industrys navet, is turning to the Russells of the world for public validation in order to sidestep public accountability.

Musks outburst seemed to reach its logical conclusion in his response to the journalist Joshua Topolsky, who implored Musk to stop and think. Topolsky: Do you think its in the interest of powerful people to A: support a free press that exposes their lies, or B: tear it down so their lies are easier to tell? Now ask yourself why the polls would look bad. Musk: Who do you think *owns* the press? Hello. Musk rebuffed the suggestion that he was appealing to the anti-Semitic stereotype that Jewish people control the media. The point he was making, he said in a follow-up tweet, was that powerful people own the press. (He did not make the point that many of these owners are, like him, powerful billionaires.) There is no evidence that Musk actually cares about high-quality journalism. There is no evidence that Musk is motivated by anything other than his own sense of vulnerability, or ego, or his well-documented trollish instincts. Musk was indignant at comparisons to Donald Trumpanother infamous journalist-hater of the momentbut he has clearly invited such comparisons through his behavior. Both men lack restraint in self-publishing. Both appear to be thin-skinned beyond reason. And both use Twitter as a way of bypassingand engaging withwhat they see as an unruly press corps. The veteran television journalist Lesley Stahl recently shared an anecdote about how Trump responded when she asked him, in 2016, why he bashed journalists so. I do it to discredit you all and demean you all so when you write negative stories about me no one will believe you, Stahl says Trump told her.

Journos hound me constantly for interviews, but I do almost none these days, Musk tweeted last week.  Twitter as it allows me to bypass journo bs. Musk loves a spectacle, which is a useful quality in a person with his rsum. He has complained about journalists in the pastincluding fixating on seemingly inconsequential inaccuracies. Bloomberg article today also has oddly false details, he tweeted in 2014. I don't eat breakfast at Tesla and drink coffee, not juice. He has been compared to Howard Hughes and Ernst Stavro Blofeld, the Bond villain parodied as Dr. Evil in the 1990s Austin Powers films. Musks showmanship is well documented. So, too, is the delight he takes in provoking people. Musk has burned through public-relations staffers with comical efficiency, Vance wrote. He tends to take on a lot of the communications work himself, writing news releases and contacting the press as he sees fit. Musk often tells of an epiphany he had in the early days of SpaceX, when he realized that people had not given up on truly ambitious space travel. If you can show people that there is a way, then there is plenty of will. It is hard to imagine a better linewhere theres a way, theres a willto encapsulate the techno-populism upon which Elon Musk built his success. Here is a detail that any journalist thinking of accepting Musk at his word alone should remember: At one of Musks internships at a start-up in Silicon Valley, hed overheard a disastrous visit from a Yellow Pages spokesperson who couldnt articulate what the company was doing to adapt to the internet age. Consider how Kimbal, Elons brother, described the way they came to Zip2, from Vances biography: Elon said, These guys dont know what theyre talking about. Maybe this is something we can do.

In other words, Musk wasnt called to the media industry because he was passionate or even particularly interested in journalism, or the role of an independent press in a functioning democracy. (The arguments journos are using against the public are word for word the same arguments despots use against democracy, he tweeted on Saturday, apparently without irony.) Musk is typically far more interested in tearing down institutions and reinventing them, than fixing them outright. He can see that the journalism industry has been slow to adapt technologically and culturally to the technologies and rising populism of the political moment. Hes right that the publics faith in journalism is faltering. And given that Musk has shown so much imagination in remaking entire industries, why shouldnt he take a big swing at fixing the media? Musks Twitter mentions are full of people celebrating the wisdom of the crowd, and offering to moderate his new site. All this has a very 1990s feel about it, which is, I guess, appropriate. Elon Musk comes from an age where the promise of the open web was utopian and also deeply capitalistic. It was an invitation to do whatever you wanted online, and maybe get outrageously wealthy if you found the right levers to pull. Musk was there, and he cashed in on the promise to help newspapers nail the landing in a leap from print to pixels. (They didnt.) Defending himself among naysayers in recent days, Musk made a prediction and a request: This is going to help journalism, not harm it, he said. Please be so kind as to hold your fire until you actually see it. Something needs to be done to reward consistent, high-quality journalism, he said. Some in media are absurdly indignant before even seeing the product. Odd. Odd, indeed, that to Elon Musk, the product is not the journalism itself. Odd that it would be too simple to reward great journalism by investing in it, or by encouraging his 22 million Twitter followers to support high-quality news organizations through subscriptions. At a time when theres abundant evidence that the disappearance of local newspapers has denigrated civic life, Musk seems to think that what journalism really needs is another aggregator. But no number of upvotes will save the world.