So how do you walk the line between taking advantage of the internets many benefits while protecting yourself from the corporate interests that aim to use your data for gain? This is the push-and-pull Ive had with myself over the past year, as Ive grappled with the revelations that Cambridge Analytica has the personal data of more than 50 million Americans, courtesy of Facebook, and used it to manipulate people in the 2016 elections. Ive watched companies shut down their European branches because Europes data privacy regulations invalidate their business models. And given the number of data breaches that have occurred over the past decade, theres a good chance that malicious hackers have my infoand if they dont, its only a matter of time. While the amount of data about me may not have caused harm in my life yetas far as I knowI dont want to be the victim of monopolistic internet oligarchs as they continue to cash in on surveillance-based business models. Whats a concerned citizen of the internet to do? Heres one no-brainer: Stop using Chrome and switch to Firefox. Google already runs a lot of my online lifeits my email, my calendar, my go-to map, and all my documents. I use Duck Duck Go as my primary search engine because Im aware of how much information about myself I voluntarily give to Google in so many other ways. I cant even remember why I decided to use Chrome in the first place. The browser has become such a default for American internet users that I never even questioned it.Chrome has about 60% of the browser market, and Firefox has only 10%. But why should I continue to use the companys browser, which acts as literally the window through which I experience much of the internet, when its incentivesto learn a lot about me so it can sell advertisementsdont align with mine? Firefox launched in 2004. Its not a new option among internet privacy wonks. But I only remembered it existed recently while reporting on data privacy. Unlike Chrome, Firefox is run by Mozilla, a nonprofit organization that advocates for a healthy internet. Its mission is to help build an internet in an open-source manner thats accessible to everyoneand where privacy and security are built in. Contrast that to Chromes privacy policy, which states that it stores your browsing data locally unless you are signed in to your Google account, which enables the browser to send that information back to Google. The policy also states that Chrome allows third-party websites to access your IP address and any information that site has tracked using cookies. If you care about privacy at all, you should ditch the browser that supports a company using data to sell advertisements and enabling other companies to track your online movements for one that does not use your data at all. Though Mozilla itself is a nonprofit, Firefox is developed within a corporation owned by the nonprofit. This enables the Mozilla Corporation to collect revenue to support its development of Firefox and other internet services. Ironically, Mozilla supports its developers using revenue from Google, which pays the nonprofit to have Google Search as Firefoxs default search engine. Thats not its sole revenue: Mozilla also has other agreements with search engines around the world, like Baidu in China, to be the default search engine in particular locations. But because it relies on these agreements rather than gathering user data so it can sell advertisements, the Mozilla Corporation has a fundamentally different business model than Google. Internet service providers pay Mozilla, rather than Mozilla having to create revenue out of its user base. Its more of a subscription model than a surveillance model, and users always have the choice to change their search engine to whichever they prefer. I spoke to Madhava Enros, the senior director of Firefox UX, and Peter Doljanski, a product manager for Firefox, to learn more about how Mozillas browser builds privacy into its architecture. Core to their philosophy? Privacy and convenience dont have to be mutually exclusive.

Instead, Firefoxs designers and developers try to make the best decision on behalf of the user, while always leaning toward privacy first. We put the user first in terms of privacy, Doljanski says. We do not collect personally identifiable data, not what you do or what websites you go to. Thats not just lip service, like it often is when companies like Facebook claim that users are in control of their data. For instance, Firefox protects you from being tracked by advertising networks across websites, which has the lovely side effect of making sites load faster. As you move from website to website, advertising networks essentially follow you so they can see what youre doing so they can serve you targeted advertisements, Doljanski says. Firefox is the only browser out of the box that prevents that from happening. The browsers Tracking Protection feature automatically blocks a list of common trackers, something you need a specific, third-party browser extension to do on Chrome. The out of the box element of Firefoxs privacy protection is crucial. Chrome does give you many privacy controls, but the default for most of them is to allow Google to collect the greatest amount of information about you as possible. For instance, Google Chrome gives users the option to tell every website you go to not to track you, but its not automatically turned on. Firefox offers the same function to add a Do Not Track tag to every site you visitbut when I downloaded the browser, the default was set to always. Because Chrome settings that dont encourage privacy are the default, users are encouraged to leave them as they are from the get-go, and likely dont understand what data Google vacuums up. Even if you do care, reading through Google Chromes 13,500-word privacy white paper, which uses a lot of technical jargon and obfuscates exactly what data the browser is tracking, isnt helpful either. When I reached out to Google with questions about what data Chrome tracks, the company sent me that white paper but didnt answer any of my specific questions. One downside to using Firefox is that many browser extensions are built primarily for Chromemy password manager luckily has a Firefox extension but it often causes the browser to crash. However, Mozilla also builds extensions you can use exclusively on Firefox. After the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica firestorm, Firefox released an extension called the Facebook Container, which allows you to browse Facebook or Instagram normally, but prevents Facebook from tracking where you went when you left the siteand thus stops the company from tracking you around the web and using that information to build out a more robust personal profile of you. Firefox isnt even Mozillas most private browser. The nonprofit also has a mobile-only browser called Firefox Focus that basically turns Firefoxs private browsing mode (akin to incognito browsing on Chrome, but with much less data leakage) into a full-fledged browser on its own. Privacy is built right into Focuss UX: Theres a large erase button on every screen that lets you delete all of your history with a single tap. Focus and Firefoxs private browsing mode also have a feature called origin referrer trimming, where the browser automatically deletes the information about which site youre coming from when you land on the next page. The user doesnt need to think about that, Doljanski says. Its not heavily advertised, but its the little decisions we make along the way that meant the user doesnt have to make the choiceor even know what origin referrer trimming is in the first place.

Many of these decisions, both in Firefox and in Focus, are to guard against what Enros calls the uncanny valley of internet browsingwhen ads follow you around the internet for weeks. I buy a toaster, and now it feels like the internet has decided Im a toaster enthusiast and I want to hear about toasters for the rest of my life, he says. Its not a scary thing. Im not scared of toasters, but its in an uncanny valley in which I wonder what kinds of decisions theyre making about me. Ultimately, Firefoxs designers have the leeway to make these privacy-first decisions because Mozillas motivations are fundamentally different from Googles. Mozilla is a nonprofit with a mission, and Google is a for-profit corporation with an advertising-based business model. To a large degree, Googles business model relies on users giving up their data, making it incompatible with the kind of internet that Firefox is mission-bound to build. It comes back to money: While Firefox and Chrome ultimately perform the same service, the browsers developers approached their design in a radically different way because one organization has to serve a bottom line, and the other doesnt. That also means Firefoxs mission is aligned with its users. The browser is explicitly designed to help people like me navigate the convenience versus privacy conundrum. To a great degree, people like us need solutions that arent going to detrimentally impact our convenience. This is where privacy is often difficult online, Doljanski says. People say, go install this VPN, do this and do that, and add all these layers of complexity. The average user or even tech-savvy user that doesnt have the time to do all these things will choose convenience over privacy. We try to make meaningful decisions on behalf of the user so we dont need to put something else in front of them. When GDPR, the most sweeping privacy law in recent years, went into effect last week, we saw firsthand how much work companies were requiring users to dojust think of all those opt-in emails. Those emails are certainly a step toward raising peoples awareness about privacy, but I deleted almost all of them without reading them, and you probably did, too. Mozillas approach is to make the best decision for users privacy in the first place, without requiring so much effort on the users part. Because who really spends any time in their privacy settings? Settings pages arent a good UX solution to providing clear information about how data is used, which is now required in Europe because of GDPR. Control cant mean the responsibility to scrutinize every possible option to keep yourself safe, Enros says. We assume a position to keep you safe, and then introducing more controls for experts. Firefox doesnt always work better than Chromesometimes itll freeze on my older work computer, and I do need to clear my history more frequently so the browser doesnt get too slow. But these are easy trade-offs to make, knowing that by using Firefox, my data is safe with me.