Even as Amazon Prime Video and Netflix ramp up their investments in India, their hold on the market remains a rounding error next to that of local giant Hotstar. Star India-owned service, which counts live streaming of sporting events as a key to its content offering, assumed 69.4 percent of the on-demand video streaming services market at the end of Q1 2018, according to marketing research firm Jana.

SonyLiv, which like Hotstar operates on a freemium model, was the second most popular on-demand video streaming service with 13 percent market share during the same period, per Jana. Following them is Viacom’s Voot at 10.7 percent, and Amazon Prime Video at 5 percent. Netflix’s market share was 1.4 percent at the end of March, up from 0.6 percent a quarter prior to that. Both Netflix and Amazon saw substantial improvements in their market shares in Q1.

Jana says the aforementioned estimations are based on app installation data it gleaned using its mCent browser, and a spokesperson told me that the company had solely looked at Android ecosystem. That said, several marketing research firms gather their data similarly. An earlier report by Counterpoint Research — the only remarkable study to be done on this subject — published in late December, shared similar figures, adding further credibility to Jana’s findings.

In the recent months, Hotstar, which has exclusive rights to offer online streaming of some (and in some cases, most) popular HBO, Showtime, Disney, and Fox shows and movies, has lured customers by offering its annual subscription at lower costs. Earlier this year, Hotstar offered customers an annual subscription to its service at nearly the same price as Netflix’s one-month subscription cost.

Speaking at Recode’s Code Conference, James Murdoch, chief executive of 21st Century Fox (parent company of Star India), shared an update on Hotstar’s scale. He said, “If I look at our Hotstar business in India, we have 145 million monthly uniques now interacting directly with the platform up to two billion minutes a day, actually, across that platform in India.”

Google’s expansive foothold in India’s smartphone market seems to be benefiting its portfolio services. The company’s Play Music, which was launched in the country last year, is already dominating the local on-demand music streaming services market, Jana said.

Google Play Music had 63.7 percent market share as of the quarter that ended on March 31, marketing research firm Jana said Wednesday. The closest competitor it has in the market is the joint-entity of JioMusic and Saavn (the two announced merger in late March) with 26.1 percent hold of the market at the end of Q1, the report said.

With 4.5 percent market share, Gaana, which raised $115 million from Tencent and Times Internet earlier this year, is the third-most popular music streaming service in the nation, followed by Bharti Airtel’s Wynk (at 3 percent) and Hungama (at 1.3 percent). Google Play Music (with 40 percent) and JioMusic-Saavn (with 37.8 percent) also led the music streaming services market when they were compared based on average time users spend using them.

Apple Music, which is available in India at a significantly lower price than in most countries, appears to be struggling to gain traction in the nation. It had 0.1 percent of the market share in terms of time spent as of January 1. It needs to be pointed out that it is likely that iPhone users are more inclined to subscribe to Apple Music. But then again, one could argue that it would make a blip difference in its market share because iPhones themselves are struggling to find a place in the overwhelmingly Android-dominated nation.

In a press statement, Nathan Eagle, chief executive and founder of Jana, said he expects more consolidation in India’s OTT industry in the coming future. “It will take deep pockets to stave off the larger players who are all making large bets in the region,” he said.