Summary: Can hiring someone with a disability help with customer service? Recently, I was at a restaurant that did just that. I’m not sure if it was an intentional business decision, but I left quite impressed at how effective it was at making sure that all customers were on their best behaviour.

There’s a local fast food shop that makes a fairly decent pizza. I noticed a few months ago when I started buying pizzas here that the front is run by someone who has a learning disability. He’s fully competent, but it’s clear that he’s slower than someone who doesn’t have such a disability.

In a typical metropolitan area, it isn’t atypical to find people acting with a sense of entitlement, behaving rudely when they should exhibit a bit more patience. In many shops, for instance, the slightest delay in service would have meant customers crossing their arms and giving mean stares to the front desk staff and to each other. The feeling of feeling rushed and under appreciated is universally felt amongst anyone who has ever worked in hospitality. It’s a terrible feeling.

And yet, in this very restaurant, customers are unable to behave according to their default inclinations. In fact, the staff with the learning disability can take his time or even make mistakes, and customers have to still exhibit restraint in showing their displeasure.

Hiring someone who operate at a fraction of the speed of any other average individual doesn’t seem to make much business sense. But as I considered the situation more, I realized that the hiring of this very individual was a deliberate decision by the shop’s owner.

You see, a restaurant — no matter how well it’s run — will invariably run behind, such as when there are a rush of orders. Mistakes will be made in the kitchen. Customers becoming angry over even the littlest thing that doesn’t agree (deservedly or not) with them.

But having someone who is clearly trying his best and working through his disability makes it practically impossible for customers to behave angrily. To do so would reveal the ugly, dark nature that contradicts the positive light most people view themselves.

I applaud the store owner for hiring this employee, but I’m even more impressed by the fact that he has effectively implemented a crowd control mechanism by means of social appropriateness.

First, I want to make it clear that I loathe at the idea of business owners unfairly exploiting employees. In analyzing this situation, I find myself making parallels to other industries where a hire is made based on certain physical, emotional, or psychological characteristics of the individual candidate.

Many examples come to mind:

The idea that persons with learning disabilities is an exploitive hiring practice is based on the fact that we’re biased to view their disability as a disadvantage. If we reverse our thinking and say that this particular individual is just particularly effective at calming customers — something that many of us would not be able to do — then perhaps we would be less inclined to thinking that hiring them is exploitive. The corollary of this, of course, would mean an appropriate level of compensation — but that’s for another discussion.