Hacking retention is not an easy task. Truth to be told, it is the quite opposite. If done right though, retention will be the No.1 factor that will make you avoid the cursed for all SaaS founders “C” word. Yes, you guessed it right.

If you know how to retain your customers, churn will never come knocking your way down to success. It will just be there as a kind reminder, by making you acknowledge the complications of its existence.

Remind them your product’s value: Users get to be impressed by a new innovative product, use it a whole lot, getting it to become part of their daily working routine but at the end of the day many of them will tend to forget what made them purchasing a pricing plan, to begin with. It has happened to any single one of us. We get bored of having the same routine or we may even desire to get more out of a solution – without actually having a real need to get more or even if the current solution does not luck anything of the essence.

So, remind them what they tend to forget. Here is where your customer success comes into play. Create a solid customer success plan and get to ping your customers every once in a while, even when everything seems right on the other part of the bargain. You don’t need a reason to check if they would need something from you, do you? In that way, you will end up,  worst case scenario training them more on your product- and best case scenario upselling to them a better pricing plan in the future.

Don’t get discouraged by users inactivity: As Intercom states in its recent study users don’t necessarily tend to forget about you when you see a decrease in your product’s usage.

There are a million destructions out there making them not able to dedicate the necessary time to perfect your product’s usage. Especially, if those users have not established dedicated habits from day one. The solution here is simple actually. Give them reasons to use your product more:

If for any reason whatsoever, those users continue to be inactive you may need to reconsider that they are not representing your personas anymore or even more they never were. If the 2nd explanation stands, don’t spend any tears. Those users were never part of your product’s magic anyway.

Reconsider your onboarding process: What makes up a good onboarding? Well, we have covered that part extensively in the previous part of this sales series. Overall, a good onboarding reveals every part of your product’s capabilities and adds value to the user. It encourages him to complete the necessary milestones and leads them to its aha moment. Fine so far. What happens though if you have multiple personas with each one of them emphasizing in different parts of your product?

Have you customised your onboarding process to the extent that it will cover any possible case scenario? Let me be the bearer of bad news here. No, you haven’t. The SaaS companies that have done this practice are limited. Most of them forget that onboarding is a work in progress. Not to mention matured SaaS products that don’t even know what onboarding can offer to them in the first place.

If, however, for any reason you belong on those that do know its value, bear in mind that every time you get to change anything on your product your onboarding is being affected significantly. Plus, the odds are,  that your customer needs may also change- sometimes faster than your product- so you need to adapt your product usefulness to them from time to time- whether you release something new or not.

Finally, in case you are a master when it comes to onboarding consider to redesign it after you have gathered enough data about the user that you do retain. Data, that you will compare and contrast with those that you don’t and of course with your existing onboarding funnel. So, if by any chance the later users do belong in your personas you know by default what to change and optimise.

Reward engaged users: A user that has been faithful to your product for over a year is more likely to come back and renew his contract than a newly acquired one. Agreed. That stands. Now, imagine this user getting a bonus for his dedication and spreading the word to his acquaintances. Boom! You got that kind of user that will follow you no matter what!

[Hello referral! More on this one though on our next chapters] The reward could be something minor like a free dedicated consultation from your customer success manager every month – which you don’t offer to any user- to a monthly 5% off the user’s annual plans.

As with every stage of the funnel, there is no magic recipe when it comes to retention too. If you get to know your user, if you have created the right personas and targeted them you have big odds of actually building a basic clientele that will expand over time as your product gets matured. Having that said, no user feels totally satisfied with the benefits any solution provides to him. EVER.

You should continuously revisit the approaches you use to engage with your user and of course deliver an improved product as the time passes by. If, you don’t someone else will anyway and you already know that. That’s the magic and the curse of a SaaS product. So embrace it in any possible way you can.